Okay, we're talking to Steve Wiley at the Massachusetts Historical Society, December 5th, 1989.
Go ahead.
I read a French book recently, and it was always fascinating.
That's a wonderful book.
Yeah, wonderful book.
I haven't known about it before.
I thought it was made at a table about a month ago.
Did you really?
In New York.
That's the Oxford Press book.
Yeah.
Excellent.
Wonderful book, and how he stuck to it through the years.
is the relationship of Kelsey Conrad, who was very interesting.
She loved Conrad.
Yeah.
But they had a parting of the ways for a while, yeah.
Well, however, I also have Quinn's auction channel on it.
Mm-hmm.
Well, things were so... The part of the piece was Conrad.
Right, Conrad, yeah.
So even though they may have had the parting, I think that he still recognized him.
But anyway, I'm sure there's nothing.
Well, who are the people you're going to check?
Well, one of my chapters,
My early chapters, when we start to focus on the American collectors, we'll have Jeremy Bell, and this will be one chapter for Isaiah Thomas, Jeremy Belknap, John Carter Brown, and Logan from Philly, I think.
A little bit of Thomas Jefferson founding of those who were not founding, but Stockler, a great congress.
So I'm really quite interested in Jeremy Belknap, and I think he could help me
Give me some insights.
Maybe Prince too, but certainly as a precursor, one who collected, but one who didn't preserve.
Maybe there's something to be learned there.
Well, Prince had a great collection.
At one time, it was all here.
Most of it was here in this building.
Not this building, but in the Society.
In the Society.
Yeah.
And actually, there were a number of copies of the Bay Sound Book in the library at that time.
And we never, we never have owned a couple of them.
And then later we pulled out of here, and I guess it was in the Old South for a while.
Did they sell?
All of us were out there, yeah.
What are we talking?
Are we still prior to the revolution now, or?
No, that's afterwards.
Afterwards, yeah, yeah.
He was a man of that time, the library, which went on.
Doesn't legend have it that he left a lot of stuff in the church and the British used it to light fires, or is that just an apocalypse?
It might be, but I don't know.
Well, things like that do happen.
What do the soldiers think about just people?
They might have done that.
I don't know.
But I was interested in the library because
It seems so strange that this wonderful book, and there was a number of copies in the library, and the Society never wrote one.
How was that?
Well, they were not out and out.
We were just storing them.
So, did you make a pitch to get one?
I don't know whether anyone did or not.
I would have had.
I would have made one.
And maybe... I mean, Mark's got one out in... Yeah, they have one there, yeah.
I think Isaiah Thomas got that, actually.
He may well have.
Of course, there aren't too many of them around, and the last one, of course, came up in the... Let's see, what was it?
No, it was Harvard.
Harvard has a copy.
Yeah, Harvard does have a copy.
They've got one down at Philadelphia or something, let's see if they have a copy.
Well, I think there are 1011 copies around.
But it's on an awfully high price.
Some of those things, we think it was a high price.
Now we look at auction catalogs.
And the price is staggier.
Well, I went to the garden auction in New York three weeks ago.
And the Shakespeare's went for $2 million.
The increments and the bids were in $50,000 increments.
$50,000
to stay in the bidding.
That's how much Huntington paid for Gutenberg Bible in 1911, $50,000, which was a staggering figure then.
Of course it was.
Well, I went to the street of sale because we bought two big books for us.
First time we ever had enough money to buy anything like that.
Which were they?
We bought the first sermon delivered in this country before the full ones in 1621.
And of course, it had to be printed in England because there was no clean pressure.
We paid $10,000 for it.
So when approximately was this?
Oh, gosh, it was about the 57, maybe in the 60s.
Did you consider that a lot of money then?
$10,000 is unheard of for us to pay $10,000 for a book.
And then they thought, we actually, we really didn't have the money.
But I brought it to the council's direction that these two things were coming up.
I knew Tom's freedom.
And I read part of the preface to the sermon.
and served some attention there and said, well, Tom Adams said, well, let's make a sporting venture.
Let's see if we can raise some money to get that.
This is Tom Adams.
Yeah.
It could be interesting for me to talk to you, by the way.
Yeah, he doesn't know that great much about books, though.
And then the other thing that was coming up was Maud's relation, the first account of the sale in the Mayflower, and we didn't have that.
Well, Cushing came up first.
My boss was giving for us.
Who is this now?
Mike Walsh.
He's a dealer?
He can kind of interview him now, he's dead.
Okay, but I'm just curious.
Mike Walsh.
This is just because it's just the name on the tape, so just so I know what we're talking about.
Michael J. Walsh was an arcana man of good speed.
Okay, good, fine.
He's waiting for you.
And he was actually put in charge of this position of the library by Tom Sweden.
He had great faith, and Mike Walsh and everybody did.
He was one of the great men.
George Goodspeed can tell you a lot about him.
Well, Mike was in front of us, and I didn't know.
Of course, they make a little movement of their hand, you know, when they're taking a bid, and I couldn't see anything.
When they went for $10,000, I thought, well, that's not too bad.
We have 16 left.
We've collected 26,000.
When the march came up, I said, I don't go for less.
Well, it's 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
And it was knocked down at 16 times.
Ah, that's just what you had.
Yeah.
And I didn't know that we had it, you know.
And so, then Mike, I didn't know they turned around and looked at me or not, but it was a great day.
Where was the ocean?
In New York.
That was one of the great libraries that you saw.
The Street of Sales.
There were four, I think, four catalogs.
They are a copyist in the United Society.
No, he was, he did a great collection on railroads, and I guess, one of his collections he gave the American Antiquarian Society.
So, you know, it's not true to very well.
He was a member there, too.
He lived in, I think it was, I guess.
What was the source of his wealth there?
Well, I think he was a lawyer, and I was told that he made and lost money.
And I think his father, I've also been told, was the lawyer for an everyday career.
Really?
Yeah.
I think you've got to check him over.
Oh, yeah, check everything.
Yeah, yeah.
And so Tom was a wonderful fellow.
Why do you think he didn't give the collection away?
No, he was a collector that felt that all people ought to have a chance at these great things, which he had collected.
This is a theme that I would explore, too, you know, like the Bradley Martin sale that's going on now.
Some feel that they had great fun, and why not shouldn't some other people have fun.
How do you feel about that?
Well, I am in favor of it, sure.
Even though you're on the institutional side,
Well, if it spreads around, usually some of it comes back to us.
You don't get them all, and you can't hope to get them all.
And besides, that's not our first purpose in collecting.
I mean, we do collect Massachusetts imprints, and so we have a fine collection there.
But we don't compare with the Apparent Society, which has been the first place on, because they collect it widely.
And they were fairly in the game, and they have
the Isaiah, the Thomas collection of Sabbath.
So our interest really, we do collect infants of Massachusetts and things relating to Massachusetts, but we do not go way out trying to collect everything that comes along.
Let somebody else do that.
No one can really collect
on a national scale in my country.
Marcus Bond called the American Antiquarian Society National Library of American History.
There's no library except the Library of Congress, in my view.
And I bet that practically every state was collecting the same things, because they had own state papers.
Which is good.
I think it is good, yeah.
But the Antiquarian Society has a marvelous collection, and especially in some newspapers that we all know.
You have some wonderfully eccentric things, too.
I think that's one of the things you find with private collectors often is eccentricity.
You know, somebody might collect railway tickets or something.
Oh, yes, yes.
I've just finished reading a book written by the fellow, read it last night, as a matter of fact, who's head of the Children's Museum here, I guess.
And he collects postcards.
I have a wonderful collection of postcards.
You know whose collection of postcards I am?
Francis Henry Taylor's collection.
Oh, really?
Uh-huh.
I bought it at the Clark auction, as a matter of fact.
Remember they had an auction there a couple of years ago?
Yeah, yeah.
And I went there.
Oh, shut this up.
There's more than that.
There's a man, the name of Braco, I think.
It was just a paperback, .
And from the time he was just a boy who started collecting postcards, his father would send him postcards.
And he's continued all his life, and his book was completely involved with postcards, all the events of his life.
He was fascinating.
He gave one of the best talks I've ever heard.
Is this a new book?
I think so.
It was in the Western Public Library.
You know the book?
Hmm?
I think I know the book.
Yeah.
And so he talked before the Harvard Federalist book.
And over a year, he was down in the middle of Africa living with a native tribe.
He was a world scholar from Illinois.
I thought he was English.
He was actually from Illinois.
And he's been involved in all sorts of things.
And I was here, head of the, I think, Children's Museum.
And here's a count of the living with this Indian tribe.
There were only about a hundred in the tribe.
And they just got off the plane.
They dropped him off the plane.
He walked through the jungle with a guide for a while.
Then the guide deserted him as soon as he was paid off.
And he went along and said, yes, it's that.
Who wouldn't be?
Is this in the book or is this?
It's partly talked about in the book.
Because they tell us about just being dropped off in a plane.
straight ahead because he didn't know where he was in the jungle.
And he must have a lot of courage.
And finally, he came to the natives, and they looked at him for a while, and then they accepted him and lived with him for a year.
And he was absolutely fascinated by them.
I'm going to have to talk to this guy.
He's a very interesting man.
And he got to know very many people there, some of the top people and some of the writers and so forth.
I decided to look at it last night, and I said, kind of a book is this.
And I noticed the name.
So I went ahead and read it.
It's about 100 pages, something like that.
But it's all based on postcards.
I think I have the book.
I know the book.
My book is not just about books by no stretch of advantage.
It's collecting things
which tend to document the way we have lived.
And I think it goes back to Jeremy Belmatt.
I mean, he said, we need a good repository.
Yes, of course, he saw too much of the things being destroyed and burned up and so forth, and so forth.
Do you think he actually saw this?
I don't think so.
Ted Shipman used to say a lot of them had disappeared because of that.
I mean, but this sort of abuse was going around.
It was rampant that he was cognizant of it.
Yeah, sure.
Sure he was.
He knew there was love.
And he goes and his own accounts of things are going to places and finding things just scattered around and piles and rotting away.
Where can I read some of this stuff?
What kind of stuff I'm looking for?
Well, actually, Lem Tucker is hoping to
write an account of him.
I did just an essay somewhere, probably a copy of society.
It was done by a director by the name of Lord, who just edited a kind of sketches of book people.
Is this something that I can see?
I have to see if it's a copy here.
I have a copy of it.
Oh, it certainly did a full
a reference of my book, but the kind of information.
Yeah, Clifford Law was a man who was a very well-known historian and director of libraries, mostly historical societies.
But that's the kind of thing that I'm looking to see.
I'm certainly not going to write a whole book about that.
Oh, no.
He may account for five or ten pages in my book.
But he died yet, too.
He died yet, but look what he established.
Well, you'll find the accounts of all the things in the press writings about proceedings.
Okay.
Uh-huh.
And these are, I could come in and read some of these.
You read them in the ad press?
Sure.
Okay.
And there must be an index to look up on that point.
Oh, there's indexes all over there.
See, these are the collections.
These are the proceedings.
Index, yeah.
And there ought to be indexed the first of 1791.
So the index had to be 25.
But if I wanted to find out this background and these things you should tell me about Belknap reporting, having seen this stuff piled up and being destroyed.
Well, he was a minister up in Dover, New Hampshire.
And he wrote a history of New Hampshire, and everybody said it was pretty good.
It's a very good history of New Hampshire, yes.
There are the references on film map right there.
Okay.
Reverend Jeremy.
Now these are all references here, right here in the proceeds?
Yeah, they're in the proceeds.
Okay, this is volume 1791, 1883.
Let's write it down so I don't have to go looking for it again.
1791, 1883.
And then that refers me to articles that are in all these proceedings.
Yeah, in the M.H.S.
proceedings.
And you think everything that I need about him, I will find in there.
Most of it you'll find in there.
I think your daily workings and so forth in the beginning of society.
But some of the great anecdotes, how he is said to have sat down with Paul Revere and said to write this, think that.
Well, he did, Paul Revere's account.
It was done in 1798, and it's the fullest account.
He wrote for Jeremy Donner, the last one to write.
Is that the kind of thing I'll find in the proceedings?
Sure.
If you don't, I'll be disappointed.
Actually, at first, they were trying to get the deposition by Paul Revere about who fired the first shot.
We had an early account of the position written by him, which was in the Deer papers.
And then one of the Deer sisters, two girls, and they both died in the last two years.
And one called me and said that she had found an earlier account of the riot.
It was a rough draft of this riot.
Now, whose sisters were these?
Revears.
They were readers, girls.
They were descendants of Paul Revere.
Descendants of Paul Revere.
So, these things had remained in the family archives.
They were in the family, and the papers were here on deposit.
And so, what happens when you get a phone call like that?
Do you get excited?
I get kind of excited, yes, because I've noticed
And then in a day or two, I was going down to talk to Gloria Club about our collections.
And she said, well, she wouldn't want that.
We'd already get a copy.
And I said, I am going down with Gloria Club to talk about the Society of Stakers.
And I said, I would just
loved to be able to talk about this.
And so she said, oh, well, I guess .
So she gave it to me.
And what was it when you, was it wonderful when you saw it?
Because you see, the first, the later copies were explicated, because not even a damn man to be captured by the British, and I got to use four little words .
So you have that .
They're all printed in a volume of our, what we call our picture books.
all in facsimile.
And with an introduction, we used to have, I guess every year, I don't know, I'm very sorry, it was discontinued, a book, sort of an exhibition, and the book could be about the exhibition.
And we'd have a well-known scholar who'd write the introduction, like Evan Morgan, you know,
It was based on an even series of lectures I had here.
I used to have a theme for them, and this sentence he was.
Fred Merck did one, and Morrison did one, and Frank, I don't think.
my house dinner about two weeks ago.
He's right, and she had Franklin Butler, Franklin Delano.
Not Ken Davis.
No, no, no, no, no, no, Franklin Delano.
And so, we got out right downstairs in the reading room under the shelf there.
We still copy the bill.
It's funny how those things went then.
It was a great day, the day, again, came in 1956.
In the Adams family, Poseidon, the papers had been put here.
They were actually given a room in which to keep the family papers.
Here.
Yes.
And this was strictly extraterritorial.
because nobody else could join me.
Really?
And this went on for years and years, and one of the members of his family was kind of curated.
He was a Henry Adams, and John Adams, who became the director of the President of the East Society in 1950.
The East Society?
The East Society from 50 until 57.
Then he was succeeded by his son, Tom.
And I became director in 57, so I worked for John Adams.
I did a lot of camping around the country, and he was out in the West, and he was a young man, just out of college.
His father was a great railroad man, a great thing, but one of the, I don't know if it was Montana or something like that, and he sent his sons out, and it never panned out, but John Adams was up there for a while, and he'd tell me about it.
experiences.
It was wonderful.
I mean, this was in the West, was it?
It was in the 90s, 1890s.
And a lot of the time, Francis Parkland was a little afterwards.
So I finally, I must have gotten the courage, and I said, Mr. Adams, that started so interesting.
I said, I wish you would write it down.
This is 1956, though.
This was before he retired.
And he finally consented to write down about these stories.
Just one particular story he told me about he and his friend had been out riding.
And it's getting down at dusk, and they were in along the Snake River.
And it was going down what they called a draw.
And when they found a little sort of cabin there, and they went up.
and the lady asked if it would be possible for them to spend the night there.
It was a simple little place, only two rooms, one kitchen, living room, you know, and the second bedroom.
So they invited him, and the husband and the other.
And they had dinner, and then she showed them the bedroom, and two beds in it, you see.
And so he said he and his friend were in one bed,
And then they wondered how the lady was going to handle this situation.
And she said, well, she kind of even dressed in the kitchen and put on a nightgown.
And then she came in bearing a cool oil lamp.
She said, we could greatly see the lady.
who lost the life in heaven.
Simple.
Because I've never become this.
So no man, because then John Adams was, then his late 70s, but all his life he had remembered this woman who had probably no education whatsoever.
But I'm coming.
Didn't.
But she carried that lamp.
And I loved the coal, oil lamp.
What was the word, coal?
Coil?
Coil.
A-L, oil.
I just love that story, and I finally got them to print it, and it's printed in our proceedings.
But you said the great moment came in 1956.
When the great moment came, right after the papers had been here for so many years, and so many scholars had tried to get permission to use them, and usually the family was very reluctant to get permission.
Why do you think so?
Well, they were private family papers, and I guess the feeling was that if they opened it, then there'd be a rush, you know, and everyone would want to get them.
I can't understand that thinking, or anything.
But at any rate, so many scholars are trying to get them.
Samuel Faglimas was doing his biography of John Quincy Adams, and he got along very well, and this was
Mr. Henry Adams, who helped him find materials on papers, he would do the researching for Mr. Demus and he would come out and show him things or write things down for him.
So it was a very untenable relationship.
And Sam Demus was .
He was professor at Yale.
And I was here, and then I came to know him very well.
In fact, I did all the checking for him on his second violin, because he had to go back.
His sabbatical was over.
And I was the only one who knew anything about the collection at that time.
So I checked all his quotations to see if they were accurate and so forth.
He insisted that he was going to paint, and I said, no, I didn't really want any paint.
And now he said, I won't let you do it.
And so I said, well, all right.
I said, we're going to house in Western.
I said, we'll name one moon after you.
I came and stayed with us many times.
You're a wonderful man, really.
So the great moment was when the... And then, the great moment in 56,
was when the Addams Family decided to turn all of their huge collection papers over to the society.
There were no qualifications for that?
Well, uh... With some of the... No, really, yeah, because I went with, uh... What was his first name?
Lyman's not a few of the Addams papers.
His brother.
Oh, there's an older brother.
was working for Time Life.
Time Life put up a lot of money to be able to publish things from the papers.
And I remember Roger Butterfield, he's done the books and so forth.
So Roger Butterfield wanted to meet John Adams and I could come out to Adams' house.
And I can remember, I was asking Mr. Adams if there'd be anything that would be held back.
And then we turned around and said, no.
He said, no.
And no restrictions.
So you've been with the society for how long?
1934.
But what a perspective.
John Adams, plus I wasn't at all sure of it.
And I didn't think really about it.
I was made librarian when I came back from the service.
And then I worked with John Adams for a long time, and there came a time
I was approached to go to New York Historical Society.
And I went down.
I told John Adams.
He said, well, you must go down there.
And I found out about it.
And again, we were very poor at that time.
Very poor.
This society and the New York?
This society.
Because the New York claims to be very poor now.
They were what they were at one time.
Tom Spreeder was their treasure and they were wealthier.
Well, that's what you have turned to another one.
Yeah, well, that's been a mess, an absolute mess.
So, John Adams, when he was going to retire, he knew about this, and I went down, I told him, back, and when I came back, I went down, and he came up to see me, and he said, well, Stephen, he said, well, Mr. Adams will not come.
He's at the time, and I said,
My wife and I didn't want to leave the game.
I didn't want to leave the society.
And she said, well, I'll tell you what I did.
It needed to advance my salary, which had been legal.
There was no money here.
It's rich in materials.
It's much better off now.
One thing I wanted to do was build an addition to it.
We didn't know things come in, especially if you think of a whole range of shows.
And so then he sought what else his choice becomes less than.
So in the 55 years that you've been here, would you say that if you were to pick one single event, would you say then that it was the
Well, the Adams family papers, that is the greatest moment for you.
And at the same time, we were given the .
So, you see, there was a double barrel of them, and I said, I never would see this again.
The paper was absolutely huge of those, just 500,000 papers.
We're talking about the Adams family papers.
Well, this will occupy scholars well into the next century, from what I understand.
Well, they expect that they have the money to continue it, a hundred dollars.
Harvard's involved with this, isn't it?
Yes.
So those are just... But that's good, because you have the backing of a university press which will put the funding that goes along with that.
Well, for the plenty of the violence on it.
The funding hasn't come along from the National Historical Publications Commission.
and with help of some of the foundations.
But foundations don't like long projects, I think.
They've got something accomplished.
But you're not going to accomplish any of these things.
So, oh, there are five different... I don't want to lose any of this, so I have to just keep checking.
There are five different projects.
The Franklin papers were being done at Yale and the American Philosophical Society.
They both had four inches.
The Hamilton papers were done at Columbia.
They were completed.
As the editor said, thank God for birth.
That's wonderful.
Is that on the record?
Did somebody actually say it?
Yeah, he said it.
You were told he said it.
Who is the editor?
You'll find his name on it.
He is Professor Plumby.
Then the Washington papers, right now being the University of Virginia.
But you would have to say that these are unique.
They were never opened up.
But give me some sense of their importance in your words.
Well, you have all the, you have the diaries, the greatest diary, probably, is the diary of John Quincy Adams.
That goes on and on and on and on.
And his son, Charles Francis.
Well, he was a minister of Great Britain during the Civil War.
Secretary of State.
And, well, John Quincy Adams was Secretary of State and President.
John Adams was one of the mainstays in the adoption, of course.
And then the son of Henry, and... Yeah, that goes on, but then we haven't... These will not be included.
They'll be included.
This edition is supposed to go up through 1889, when the wife of Charles Francis Evans dies.
That's the first three generations, you see.
And, of course, you have Africa.
But Henry Adams led us.
Which was published.
Yeah, Harvard.
Harvard Press did that.
Harvard Press did it, but... Well, I felt strongly they should be done.
In fact, at first I was thinking of doing Justice Celci letters.
So wonderful, those letters.
So then the question came up about how much they were going to do.
And I went over, Tom Wilson was in,
He was a great director.
And so, you know, when I was asked to go over, and I talked about, I thought, .
Because truthfully, I'm a little tired of Henry Adams after all.
Everyone who came here wanted to work on Henry Adams, you see.
Francis Taylor came in one day.
He had retired from the Metropolitan, he was in Worcester, and he said, I have been commissioned to do an introduction to St.
Michel.
He said, I don't really know anybody.
He said, I was just there as a young man.
So, he said, could I look at the papers?
And so, in this case, I brought him up and set him down.
and he came down about two hours later.
He said, what a wonderful man.
God, I said, here goes another one.
They're all so-and-so.
When I went over to have a person, I said, look, I said, we have more people coming to this society to work on Henry Adams and read his letters.
I said, they are, I think, at Gouldmine.
The Gouldmine has done some copies.
But the six volumes are out, and an awful lot to do with them, because I pushed it, and I hope get some money for them through one of the others.
And that maybe diverts some of the attention of the scholars now back to the other.
Now that they're out, now the other Adams family members might get even a bit of attention.
You've said ahead of one angle.
I don't, I think they're all very bright, and all can write.
All seem to be able to write.
And they enjoyed writing.
He literally died in the house floor.
No, no, he was taken into a... But I mean, he was... He was right in action, right up for a while.
He was there when he hit.
I have liked John Quincy Adams.
A lot of people found him very hysterical and so forth.
But I have great admiration for him and the way he stuck in and did his job.
He didn't want to retire.
He never wanted to retire.
Well, he went back to the House.
He was a president to go back to the House.
I don't suppose that the Adamses have ever been really great for us.
That they served their country well.
They served them well.
But I think John, Quincy Adams was a great session.
I think Dean was also killed as the Secretary of State.
It was a great triumph.
So that's a great day for the Historical Society.
What would the alternative have been, do you think, if they hadn't have given them to the United States?
They wouldn't have sold these things.
Well, we had a session out in Quincy, and we talked about the necessity of
and making them available.
And we talked first with a microtome addition.
And they agreed to that.
We went ahead and made a microtome.
And I told her, I don't know how many sets now, but they must be set all over the world.
It must have been a pretty expensive thing.
It was.
And it was, we signed off a lot.
I can't remember it was $3,000.
I would guess more than that.
Well, half a million patients.
I think it's probably .
They have an arrangement .
That's how that was, that's a great day, and there's another great day, isn't there?
Great collection, but no one would talk to you, honestly.
That's the greatest thing.
It's a point, and so forth.
Do you collect anything yourself?
No.
It is a point never to collect it.
So why is that?
Because your energy had to be focused here, I guess.
Well, what's the sense, I mean, of my trying to collect?
None whatsoever.
We buy the books we like.
My wife and I have our own.
She's a reader.
Well, we haven't got another inch of space at home.
But I think what I'm driving at is I think that you certainly, every time you express these, you talk about these great moments when these things came into society, you're talking like a collector, but you are collecting from society.
And I think you're getting your kick, Adam,
These things come in here.
They don't have to come into your home.
I don't know.
I know.
That's very true.
That's my great feeling was in collecting manuscripts.
I think in the institutional level, I find this with dedicated people like yourself.
You know, what's the point?
I mean, I've got everything here.
This is where it matters.
Well, you also, for example, one of the collections I got just before I retired,
It was rather strange.
And I didn't know where it was.
It was the collection of Sin of the Hoa.
And I couldn't get any information about it.
And finally, Ted Chipman heard some clue about it.
I was still in Boston, up in Needham.
And so she invited me up to see her.
And we talked about the table.
They were still looking with her, and invited me to go with her up to see her.
She said, will you bring your lunch, and I'll bring your lunch.
And we said, we'll go up.
This is important stuff, too.
This is important stuff.
And he had been head of every Republican convention.
When I had seen them, she, I don't remember what it was, at the pier house.
No, it was up in Westminster, because we were sitting on a porch.
I remember it was in the trawl, and the bees were posing around, and I thought we were eating a sandwich.
And she said, well, again, you had better tell me why the paper should go to you rather than .
You must have run into this a lot, in competition for things.
Oh, yes, and I did there.
And so, she said, you must write me a letter and tell me why.
Meanwhile, you're concerned that the place might burn out, you know.
So, I wrote a little letter, and I said, well, we had the papers here.
They were on deposit from the Capitol.
She had been sent a weird poem during the same period.
So they didn't make any care.
Yes, they managed.
and she accepted them so i bet you were right there within 24 hours to get this well we had to hire a truck let me see if i have a picture oh my god the heat and that was cool so you see there oh that's a nice little room you have here yeah oh it's a model
How often do you come in?
I come in three or four days, please.
I'll give you one of these if you'd like to have it.
Oh, I'd love to have anything.
Oh, please, yes.
This was done every time, and they did it without knowing anything about it.
Yeah, well, it was—what they did was I—
Are you going to give me that?
Would you describe it for me?
Spoken as a true collector.
I'm just going to shut this off.
They were very clever, you know.
This is the staff.
They got together, and they had the president and everybody else in there.
And they got this portrait out of my house,
And then they had it back in my house by the time I got home from work.
So they had it out, had it photographed, and then got it back again.
So Tom Adams wrote the introduction.
And then Malcolm Freyberg and the others.
and these friends, even these, Carol Dudo, who was an American group viewer, they were all in it.
They printed this.
It's beautiful.
And then they... I can't think of you enough of this, really.
Oh, boy.
That was as I graduated from Parkingworth.
So, and then they had an essay I did on the manuscript collection, and then they took my annual reports.
That photograph was a famous photographer for life.
He did a series of photographs from the time of life that was going to be a support.
That's John Adams.
I was so proud of him.
That's the gentleman who finally said to publish it all.
This is Henry Lee Shattuck.
who gave us more money than he ever received from anybody.
I would say, I'd say, you know, a million and a half.
Wow.
And then there's the books.
He gave us the Copley book of John Hancock, and what was that, Prince of Zay?
Millions.
And he always had a liking for the Irish.
Now this man is a benefactor, is a collector, even if he's not sure.
Mr. Shattuck?
If a man does something like that...
Thomas Candleside Trekkens.
That was a man who made the great fortune in China, Drayton.
He was one of the first to go over there in a supercar.
He was in the 1970s.
He must be well represented at the Essex Institute then.
How about that happened?
Salem?
Maybe at Peabody, but not so much.
He was in Boston.
He was in politics, and then this was Alan Forbes who hired him.
He had a great salary of $25 a week.
which was not bad in 1934.
These are friends of mine.
This is the man when we were talking about trying to get these two rare books.
He taught at MIT.
He said I had some small distinction.
And he had this kid come over and something that needed to hear.
He could slip Tom Adams and make it to help get those books or stuff.
And he needed to get a place and sell it.
That's this gentleman here?
Yeah.
And his name is?
Henry Adamus Sever.
Ah, okay.
Sever.
Yeah, and Hamilton was very good to us, too.
And so these were, that's a typical Adam's face.
I have a drawing of him that the artist didn't hear to me.
That was the man alive.
This was Stuart Mitchell, who was the director before me, a brilliant man.
This is the top half the roof.
It was a dirigible going back.
Now, when you were going to Clark University, did you have any idea that you would be doing this kind of work?
I didn't know what I'd be doing.
All I know is that I always loved books.
And at the age of 15, I started working with the public library.
I stayed there until I came down here.
I worked in the reference department.
There are such wonderful people there.
Most of the people in the reference department were some of the graduates of the early women's colleges, like Smith.
One was, her father was a book by the Maude Wesley, and there was a Mr. Robinson, a wonderful stately lady who came from, went to Boston University.
And then the reference librarian was Miss Wood, Grace Wood, a very sort of scared New English interest, but it was wonderful because she was at every commencement.
I mean, MIT, Clark, and so forth, she'd be in the audience to see her voice.
We would grant after books, and eventually as you get older, you're in charge in the evenings and so forth.
I love the library.
So you've always had this reverence for books.
Oh, I've always had that, yeah.
And I guess I got a ticket to the Western Public Library when I was about five.
And I used to go and spend my Sundays there, you know, at Southern Bells on Hunt Street.
Who would know that?
They had a candy store and ice cream and so forth.
You know, you'd get a sack of pink about that size of a nickel.
What do you feel when you walk in this building?
When you're surrounded by these wonderful things?
Well, I'm so used to them now, but they move me every time I see them.
Well, there are two.
One is a teacher's French and Greek's college, a nun.
And the other is a head of the foster department, also a nun at St.
Joseph's College .
So I came out and I put out some of the big declarations of independence and death.
And the first and second drafts of the United States Constitution.
Not bad.
We have the journal kept by John Winfrey from North that time.
By the society or by a publishing?
No, it'll be done by the society, yeah.
And because the papers
uh have been uh with the papers have been turned not all of them through john whitford's period now confirmed they're twerking on one now on some of the letters crystal letters from lincoln and you have don't have papers in the chest there was this is i was free so you just need to have you'll have to uh help that
I'll be fine.
If Marcus doesn't have this... They'll have them.
I'll come here.
Well, are we getting off your track?
No, no.
No, we were talking about the feeling that you get with these extraordinary things.
You have the Lincoln letters, that exchange of letters for the Gettysburg... Well, you have other things that move you just as greatly.
The Edward Everett exchange with Washington and Lincoln, I think, was one of the greatest exchanges we had in American history.
I mean, because I didn't like Edward Everett.
He married into a Brooks family, as did Charles Francis Adamson and Edward Everett.
Edward Everett and then there was a probably handsome three, and Brooks was an opiate man in this area.
But later on, I don't think that Charles Francis Adams at first liked him very well, but he can't have a change of mind about him, because he did an awful lot going around the country, raising money for restoration in Washington, not running.
But, of course, he was a fine artist.
He was one of the great young scholars, the first to go abroad and to study in German universities.
to see the Russian, the Greek Revolution.
And then he's kept one of the longest diaries.
I'm trying to get, you know, Oscar Handel and do it.
But in the diary, have I told you this before?
No.
Well, of course, he had this great speech to give, which he had prepared.
And he had a program in advance in the Boston Valley Advertising.
And then he took those narrow strips, you know,
And he noted on the fly leaf, I had this printed in advance in the Daily, Boston Daily Advertising, particularly in E2, Gettysburg.
He placed it on the desk and did not look at it.
He gave it from memory.
Really?
And while he said part, he'd gotten part together and so forth.
And they were, that was two hours long, and they listened without apparent uneasiness.
And then he was so tired, I guess, and sat down and making a game of, you know, the best lasted about it.
Perhaps.
He didn't even say anything about it, you know, that puzzle.
He didn't say a word about it.
But the next day, he wrote to Lincoln.
and thanked him for the courtesies extended.
He had his daughter with him.
And he said, I wish I had been as successful in approaching the central idea of the occasion in two hours as you did in two minutes.
And Lincoln replied, we have his work.
In our respective parts yesterday, I could not have been excused to make a sharp address while you are wrong with it.
I am pleased to know that in your
judgment, the little I did say, is not entirely a failure.
Isn't that a wonderful exchange?
Wonderful.
Wonderful exchange.
And I thought the other day... Gracious on both parts, too.
On both sides.
Both sides.
And they were telling the truth, really.
How did these come to the Society?
How did you get... We got all the Lincoln papers.
Edward's papers.
It's useful.
But the Lincoln, of course, the Lincoln letter would come with it, yeah.
Actually, at one time... But how about the letter that he sent to Lincoln?
How did you get that?
He kept a copy.
He kept it in his own hands.
He kept letterbook copies of all those letters.
So he was thinking about the future then, wasn't he?
Well, that was the only way of keeping copies.
There were no Xerox machines.
No, nothing like that.
I mean, you either wrote it or you didn't have it.
And even, for example, when we go,
traveling, which we like to do.
My wife usually keeps a diary.
I did earlier, and then I shifted the job to her.
But otherwise, you can't remember where you've been after a while.
I mean, you have to go back and see, well, where were we in such and such a day?
So that's it.
I suppose that's, he wanted to have a record of what he did.
He was president of Harvard, who was a very great person.
But what he loved was being an ambassador to England.
That was the thing.
That was the pinnacle, isn't it?
I just keep looking at this because I don't want to miss anything because I'm going to have to turn it over.
But anyway, to go back to that story you were telling me, I'm going to just switch the tape on the other side so I don't lose anything.